Sensitive Data Redaction (#255)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/0000-sensitive-data-redaction.md

By adding the proposed features, OpenTelemetry will provide its end-users the tooling needed to make sure that sensitive data is treated according to their requirements.

This will make sure that these end-users can use OpenTelemetry within their secure and legal requirements and that OpenTelemetry (and implementing libraries) are able to avoid vulnerabilities.

## Explanation

### Overview

This proposal aims to provide the following features:

- methods for consumers of the OpenTelemetry API to enrich collected Attributes with sensitivity information and hooks to apply different levels of redaction.
- related to those methods a similar way to enrich attributes in the semantic conventions with sensitivity information and ways of redaction.
- a consistent way to configure sensitivity requirements for end-users of the OpenTelemetry SDK and in instrumentation libraries, including predefined “configuration profiles” and ways for fine grain configuration.
- A redactor implements the logic to apply redaction and that owns predefined helpers for redaction in the SDK (URLParams filtering, Zeroing IPs, etc.).

The following limitations apply:

> - Only Attributes are treated, although it is possible that sensitive data is contained in other data generated by OpenTelemetry as well (e.g. the span name, or the instrumentation scope name could contain sensitive data)

Reviewer: The log bodies can be an interesting problem, but maybe we can treat payload fields in a similar way as attributes or assume that it's instrumentation-side responsibility to redact things there. 

Some context - https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/980 attempts to introduce event bodies with sensitive opt-in fields.

Author: log bodies is an interesting case indeed! It might be possible to cover it with this OTEP as well but maybe we need to decide that it's out of scope for the first iteration. I think it is too early to decide that.

### Annotate attributes with sensitivity information

As a first building block the OpenTelemetry API needs to provide capability to enrich collected attributes with sensitivity details and with potential hooks to redact those. Those API changes then also can be used to describe sensitivity information in the semantic conventions.

#### API

Every API that sets an attribute consisting of a key and a value, needs to be enhanced by an additional functionality that allows to add details about the potential sensitivity of this data and a hooks how it may be redacted. This can be an additional set of parameters for an existing method or a method that can be called after the attribute has been set, if adding parameters to a method signature would lead to a breaking change.

An additional method for setting the sensitivity information for a span attribute might look like the following:

```

> span.setAttribute("url.query", url.toString(), <SENSITIVITY_DETAILS>);

Reviewer: It's probably more of a spec concern and we'll have more time to design and polish API, but I'd like to entertain the idea of

- Some `SensitivityConfig` instrumentation can request from `Tracer`
- `SensitivityConfig` can be configured by the SDK/distro/etc and can have different implementations for different regulations
- `SensitivityConfig` has convenience methods to redact common things like URLs. E.g. `String SensitivityConfig.redactQueryParams(Uri uri)`
- It may recognize common attributes which are known to be problematic (e.g. `client.address` on the server spans is potentially PII) and could be applied implicitly without instrumentation code

E.g. 
```java
  Span clientSpan= tracer.startSpan("GET");
  String redactedUri = tracer.getSensitivityConfig().redactQueryParams(uri);
  clientSpan.setAttribute("url.full", redactedUri);
}
```

or 

```java
  Span serverSpan= tracer.startSpan("GET /foo", SERVER);
  // the `SensitivityConfig` associated with the tracer knows that `client.address` 
  // may be sensitive and would apply whatever it's configured to do 
  // allow, drop, anonymize, etc)
  serverSpan.setAttribute("client.address", request.getclientIP()); 
}
```

Reviewer: I think it's both :)

I'd like to be able to add redaction/sanitization without **requiring** instrumentation to change their code or worry about it.

I.e. the alternative proposal is to build a reasonable story within existing API surface first.
But the proposal you made in the OTEL will still be necessary - we'll need to redact/sanitize custom attributes or to optimize and fine-tune instrumentation code for those who want it.

Reviewer: Throwing in one more suggestion - we can auto-generate semantic convention code along with the redaction.

E,g, today we generate constants like:

```java
class UrlAttributes {
   public static final String URL_FULL = "url.full";
}
```

we could instead generate a method

```java
class UrlAttributes {
   public static final String URL_FULL = "url.full";
   public static void recordUrlFull(Span span, Uri uri) {
       String redacted = getSensitivityConfig().redactQueryParams(uri);
       span.setAttribute("url.full", redacted);
   }
}
```

We still need to have a central config and a way to pass it around and make it accessible on the API level, but we can hide a lot of boilerplate and be able to partially automate it.

/cc @lquerel

Author: > I'd like to be able to add redaction/sanitization without requiring instrumentation to change their code or worry about it.

Yes, that's an important feature! With me suggestions for how to write that down in the semantic conventions this should be feasible. Let me add some wording to make this clear.

Looking at the solutions I would prefer the first one over the updated code generation for the semantic conventions, i.e. `setAttribute` should do the redaction internally, because having a method per attribute seems excessive to me (and people **will** forget to use it, vs not using the constants comes with less penalties) and people can configure their own redaction through configuration (let's say the use an application they do not have code access and this application emits "enduser.id" without redaction, they can update their sensitivity config and make sure that it is redacted)

Reviewer 2: One other problem with the suggestion. to specify redaction rules when the attribute is set is that every time someone defines an attribute, they have to consider redaction, which can fairly easily lead to forgetting about it and data leakage.

IMHO, I'd see a redaction system as something which runs in the background (@lmolkova's second suggestion), and can make redaction decisions based on various factors (the attribute name, or the value matching a regexp for example).

Reviewer 3: I would suggest to start with the most generic solution that can address all leaks, even if it's less efficient. Anything that relies on instrumentation callsite changes is fundamentally not capable of full coverage - someone will always forget some sensitivity parameter or a call to sanitizer. Whereas having a config-driven sanitizer will be able to see all data and apply rules reliably.

Author: If you want to accomplish to address all leaks you need both: a config-driven sanitizer and one that can be used on instrumentation call site. Let me make an example:

Assume that `url.query` is sanitized as outlined in [971](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/971), so there is a list of terms that will be droppes, such that a query like `?q=OpenTelemetry&sig=Sp8h9C9xJotR` will turn into `?q=OpenTelemetry&sig=REDACTED`. Now imagine a library that communicates with a 3rd party service that the use a key for the signature that's not in that list (let's say X-Example-Signature), the implementor of that library needs a way to address that. Without an API interface for that the only option is going through the semantic conventions and waiting for it to be included + the languages adding it to their implementation, whereas an API interface allows them to do the following:

```
span.setAttribute(LANGUAGE_CONSTANT_FOR_URL_QUERY, theirValue, { DEFAULT => REDACT_INSECURE_URL_PARAM_VALUES AND values for X-Example-Signature })
```

Of course this requires some semantics to append (or overwrite) existing sensitivity details.

Also, thinking about what you say, if the "configuration-driven sanitizer" is also available to an instrumentor (means via the API), they could express their redaction needs in a centralized way as well:

```
// somewhere at library entry/setup/...
OpenTelemetry.registerSensitivityDetails({
  LANGUAGE_CONSTANT_FOR_URL_QUERY => { DEFAULT => REDACT_INSECURE_URL_PARAM_VALUES AND values for X-Example-Signature },
  /* other configurations that are relevant for the use of their library */
})
```

Reviewer 4: I think this is already implicit, but to me, it's important to let users disable the redaction (ie, having a sensitivity details config that is permissive). This would allow them to not pay a performance penalty at runtime, and apply the redaction logic at the collector if this model satisfies their requirements.

Author: I reworked that section to lead with the configuration part (used some wording used here and in @pyohannes' suggestion), please take another look. I kept a section on the API but tried to express it's optional.

Reviewer 3: > Without an API interface for that the only option is going through the semantic conventions and waiting for it to be included + the languages adding it to their implementation

The user deploying the library would already have the capability to redact any attribute produced in the telemetry through a central config. Why does it need to wait for anything in semantic conventions?

There is an aspect that the user may not know that there is an attribute that should be redacted, but that problem is solved by the schemas proposal (otel-weaver), where there is a standard way of introspecting all the shapes that instrumentation might produce.

Author: The user deploying that application has this capability through the configuration, yes, but what I was talking about is the library author only having the OpenTelemetry API available? How would they be able to express their redaction requirements? I see 3 options:

- They can also add configuration through the API, which is noop until the SDK is loaded. This has the advantage of them using the same logic as the user deploying the library.
- They can use a method to express their redactions. This gives them the most local control, i.e. when there is a specific place in their code where they want to have very specific redactions.
- They can not use OpenTelemetry for that and have their own logic for it. This is OK, if we want to keep that out of the conversation for now.

(related: https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/255#discussion_r1593692898)

Reviewer 3: Library authors do not have enough context to make reduction decisions. The best they can do is tag attributes with some semantic annotation saying "this is sensitive" (e.g. in my company we have a taxonomy of "purpose policy" annotations for data elements). If I deploy this library as a user, I should be able to decide if I actually want "sensitive" to be redacted or not - I may be debugging locally and need to see all data, or maybe in production I have different pathways where the data flows, some require reduction and others require raw data.

And to add these annotations it's better to go with the schemas approach, without changing the API.

Reviewer 5: > And to add these annotations it's better to go with the schemas approach, without changing the API.

+1

Author: I think we are talking about the same thing, @yurishkuro: Indeed a library author can not make reduction decision, this is the responsibility of the application operator, but the library author needs capabilities to express that some data may be sensitive and provide redaction options similar to what we want to do in the semantic conventions. Here is an example: A library author writes a method that calls a payment provider HTTP endpoint, which has a unique query parameter to carry the token (let's say `acmeToken`). That library author now wants to say "when I call this endpoint, and a HTTP span is generated, make sure that `url.query` is redacted in a way that `acmeToken` is treated like other potentially sensitive attributes (see [#971](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/971)). Ideally they can do something similar to what is proposed for the semantic conventions, e.g. a way to write down what to do when `DEFAULT`, `STRICT` or `STRICTER` (or any other profile is selected). Then, the end user of that library and of opentelemetry can make the decision of redaction.

Reviewer 3: @svrnm yes, this is a pretty complex use case, but I would still err on the side of a centralized solution over federating these responsibilities to the call sites. It's conceivable that the semantic convention / schema for `url.query` could be extended with conditional clauses like "if I am in this instrumentation scope or the URL contains this domain name, these are the additional rules / annotations for the query elements". And I think this approach is going to be necessary in many cases anyway, because the specific HTTP instrumentation may not have any clue about this business use case, e.g. it could be a generic HTTP client interceptor that generates client spans and records URL, and only user code would have the theoretical capability of understanding the sensitivity of the query params.

Author: > It's conceivable that the semantic convention / schema for url.query could be extended with conditional clauses like "if I am in this instrumentation scope or the URL contains this domain name, these are the additional rules / annotations for the query elements".

That's what is part of this proposal, I need to optimize the wording for that, but eventually the configuration for redaction needs to be that fine-grained.

> but I would still err on the side of a centralized solution over federating these responsibilities to the call sites.

Yes, centralized is the core of it, but library/application authors still need a way to provide a hint that a redaction needs to be applied. Rethinking my example, we actually have the following situation:

A library author is likely using a HTTP client library as dependency themselves to interact with a 3rd partyAPI, so in some pseudo code they might have something like the following:

```
function authenticateWithMyService($token) {
  // they want to let OpenTelemetry know that $token is sensitive, and when
  // it is injected into the `url.query` attribute certain redaction may be required.
  use3rdPartyHttpClient("https://myservice//?myAcmeToken=$token")
}
```

How would they implement that? They need some ways to annotate that. Also those annotations need to be composable somehow.

- GDPR
- CPRA
- PIPEDA
- HIPAA
- [more…](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_privacy)

Additionally the entities operating the applications who leverage OpenTelemetry may have their own requirements for treating certain sensitive data.

Finally end-users may want to apply recommendations for [Data Minimization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_minimization), to avoid "unnecessary risks for the data subject".

**Note 1**: it is not (and can not be) the responsibility of the OpenTelemetry project to provide compliance with any of those regulations, this is a responsibility of the OTel end-user. OTel can only facilitate parts of those requirements.

**Note 2**: Those requirements are subject of change and outside of the control of the OpenTelemetry community.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

### Performance Impact

By adding an extra layer of processing every time an attribute value gets set, might have an impact on the performance. There might be ways to reduce that overhead, e.g. by only redacting values which are finalized and ready to exported such that updated values or sampled data does not need to be handled.

## Prior art and alternatives

> 

Author: Oh, how could I miss those! I didn't check OTEPs, will review them and add them to the prior art. Thanks

> 

Author: I added both to the prior art section

# Sensitive Data Redaction

This is a proposal for adding treatment of sensitive data to the OpenTelemetry (OTel) Specification and semantic conventions.

## Motivation

> When collecting data from an application, there is always the possibility, that the data contains information that shouldn’t be collected, because it is either leaking (parts of) credentials (passwords, tokens, usernames, credit card information) or can be used to uniquely identify a person (name, IP, email, credit card information) which may be protected through certain regulations. By adding OTel to a library or instrumentation an end-user of OTel is facing exactly this challenge: values of an [Attribute](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/common/README.md#attribute) may carry such sensitive data.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When collecting data from an application, there is always the possibility, that the data contains information that shouldn't be collected, because it is either leaking (parts of) credentials (passwords, tokens, usernames, credit card information) or can be used to uniquely identify a person (name, IP, email, credit card information) which may be protected through certain regulations. By adding OTel to a library or instrumentation an end-user of OTel is facing exactly this challenge: values of an [Attribute](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/common/README.md#attribute) may carry such sensitive data.
```

> When collecting data from an application, there is always the possibility, that the data contains information that shouldn’t be collected, because it is either leaking (parts of) credentials (passwords, tokens, usernames, credit card information) or can be used to uniquely identify a person (name, IP, email, credit card information) which may be protected through certain regulations. By adding OTel to a library or instrumentation an end-user of OTel is facing exactly this challenge: values of an [Attribute](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/common/README.md#attribute) may carry such sensitive data.

Reviewer 5: In additional to "values of an Attribute", the name of the span, name of the event and any other strings that come from the user could share the same problem.

Consider something like "any string value that comes from the user could carry sensitive data".

In theory non-string types may also have the issue (e.g. if folks embed identifiable information in a GUID), probably fine to leave it as doing such thing is already very anti-pattern.

Author: Thanks, I can update it accordingly. I agree that non-string values _could_ have a similar issue but it is relatively unlikely

Author: I kept it as generic as possible: `emitted telemetry may carry such sensitive data.`

While it’s ultimately the responsibility of the legal entity operating an application to protect sensitive data, end-users of OpenTelemetry (developers, operators working for that entity) are turning to the authors of OpenTelemetry – or to those of libraries that implement OpenTelemetry, like the Azure SDK – to have means in place to redact/filter sensitive data. Without that capability provided, they will raise security issues and/or will drop OpenTelemetry eventually due to it not meeting their security/legal requirements.

In this OTEP you will find a proposal for adding treatment of sensitive data to OpenTelemetry.

By adding the proposed features, OpenTelemetry will provide its end-users the tooling needed to make sure that sensitive data is treated according to their requirements.

> This will make sure that these end-users can use OpenTelemetry within their secure and legal requirements and that OpenTelemetry (and implementing libraries) are able to avoid vulnerabilities.

Reviewer 5: 💯 Nice summary @svrnm!

I suggest that we turn these into a list of principles and call it out clearly in this OTEP.
Here are some examples I could think of:

1. OpenTelemetry MUST allow the end-user to meet with their security/privacy/compliance requirements regarding the data being collected.
2. OpenTelemetry MUST not provide redaction offerings that lead to bigger security issues such as https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ReDoS (e.g. the redaction logic is poorly implemented, so a hacker could forge certain input to DDoS the redaction engine itself).

Reviewer 4: About 2: while we cannot guarantee all SDKs will provide a bug-free implementation of the redaction logic, we could offer a logic to be followed by all SDKs.

Author: Thanks @reyang, that's a good proposal, will incorporate that (+ the suggestion from @jpkrohling which I agree to, I'll try to find some wording to express that)

Author: I added those at the top of the document. I used "MUST avoid" vs "MUST not provide" since as @jpkrohling said this is impossible to guarantee, but we can put mechanisms in place to avoid them

- related to those methods a similar way to enrich attributes in the semantic conventions with sensitivity information and ways of redaction.
- a consistent way to configure sensitivity requirements for end-users of the OpenTelemetry SDK and in instrumentation libraries, including predefined “configuration profiles” and ways for fine grain configuration.
- A redactor implements the logic to apply redaction and that owns predefined helpers for redaction in the SDK (URLParams filtering, Zeroing IPs, etc.).

The following limitations apply:

- Only Attributes are treated, although it is possible that sensitive data is contained in other data generated by OpenTelemetry as well (e.g. the span name, or the instrumentation scope name could contain sensitive data)

### Annotate attributes with sensitivity information

As a first building block the OpenTelemetry API needs to provide capability to enrich collected attributes with sensitivity details and with potential hooks to redact those. Those API changes then also can be used to describe sensitivity information in the semantic conventions.

#### API

> Every API that sets an attribute consisting of a key and a value, needs to be enhanced by an additional functionality that allows to add details about the potential sensitivity of this data and a hooks how it may be redacted. This can be an additional set of parameters for an existing method or a method that can be called after the attribute has been set, if adding parameters to a method signature would lead to a breaking change.

Reviewer 5: I feel metrics should take an exception here due to the nature of cardinality and performance. Do we know if there were credential/privacy leaks in metrics systems?

Author: I would need to research on that, but I think performance will be an issue for all signals, I added that to the trade-off section already. So I wonder if we need to do some experiments eventually.

Reviewer 5: Metrics API is designed to be much faster than other APIs (e.g. it's not uncommon to have metrics APIs that are 20x faster than tracing APIs), so the perf impact would be bigger if measured by the % drop of calls/second.

Cardinality could also be an issue, for example, if the intention is to get the "unique count of users via email address", the result will be `1` if email address got redacted to "redacted@email.address".

Author: Thanks for clarification, that's a signification performance difference indeed. 

On cardinality I think there are 2 options to address that:
* if the redaction happens late (before exporting data) it is still possible to create that metric properly
* there are options to redact emails and still keep their uniqueness, e.g. by hashing the emails (or parts of it), note that hashing is a suboptimal solution since the hashed words are easy to guess & break (use a dictionary with common first and lastnames, etc.)

Author: I still need to add this into the document.

> Every API that sets an attribute consisting of a key and a value, needs to be enhanced by an additional functionality that allows to add details about the potential sensitivity of this data and a hooks how it may be redacted. This can be an additional set of parameters for an existing method or a method that can be called after the attribute has been set, if adding parameters to a method signature would lead to a breaking change.

Reviewer 6: Are we considering Baggage as a signal here? And would we consider in-band data (context propagation) as well as out-of-band data?

I think https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1633 may benefit from any spec changes related to being able to specify sensitivity of Baggage attributes to be propagated across system boundaries. I don't think this OTEP would solve the  context propagation boundary issue (Propagators would still need to define what they consider a system boundary) but I wonder, providing that Baggage is considered here, if the `SensitivityConfig` should contain something related to defining if a Baggage attribute is safe to propagate or not. I'm not convinced either way myself just now, but thought I'd raise it as we're saying "Every API".

Author: That's a very interesting thought. Since baggage may carry sensitive data it's worth looking into it (we might later to move into "future considerations"). @lmolkova example with `client.address` in https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/255#discussion_r1585199168 already called out that it might be relevant to add contextual information to the redaction, the baggage propagation is another example of that.

Author: I still need to add this into the document.

### Semantic Conventions

With the definitions above values in the semantic conventions can be annotated with `<SENSITIVITY_DETAILS>` as outlined above, with the exception that no callback functions can be supplied as redaction rules.

Example:

| Attribute | ... existing columns ... | sensitivity details |
|-----------|--------------------------|---------------------|
| `url.query`|                         | Rationale: Some verbatim wording why this is the way it is below<br>Type: `mixed`<br>`DEFAULT`: `REDACT_INSECURE_URL_PARAM_VALUES`<br>STRICT: `REDACT_ALL_URL_VALUES`<br>`STRICTER`: `DROP` |
| `client.address`|                    | Rationale: some reasons why dropping octets may be required<br>Type: `maybe_pii`<br>`DEFAULT`: `NONE`<br>`STRICT`: `'s/([0-9]+\.[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\.)[0-9]+/\10/'`<br>`STRICTER`: `'s/([0-9]+\.[0-9]+\.)[0-9]+\.[0-9]+/\10.0/'` |
| `enduser.creditCardNumber`**[1]** |     | Rationale: ...<br>Type: `always_pii`<br>DEFAULT: `EXTRACT_IIN`<br>`STRICT`: `DROP`|

> **[1]**: _This is a made-up example for demonstration purpose, it’s not part of the current semantic conventions. It gives a more nuanced example, e.g. that extracting the IIN might be an option over dropping the number completely. It also demonstrated the value of “type”, which can enable Data lineage use cases_

Reviewer 4: s/IIN/Issuer Identification Number (IIN)/

Author: applied

The `DROP` keyword means that the value is replaced with `REDACTED` (or set to null, …).

It is the responsibility of the OpenTelemetry SDK to implement those sensitivity details provided by the semantic conventions. This means that an instrumentation library does not need to add `<sensitivityDetails>` when calling an `setAttribute` method or does not need to call the additional `redactAttribute` method as outlined above. An instrumentation library may choose to apply additional redactions (leveraging the OpenTelemetry APIs or doing it before calling `setAttribute` in their own business logic).

### SDK Configuration of sensitivity requirements

The annotations and APIs as outlined above will allow SDK users to provide their sensitive requirements as configuration (here: environment variable, but can be encoded in future config files as well), e.g.

```

> env OTEL_SENSITIVE_DATA_PROFILE=”STRICT” ./myInstrumentedApp

Reviewer 5: Would this apply to the SDK globally or can be applied on specific pipelines/processors/exporters? e.g. if the goal is to send audit logs (which have EUII such as email address and IP address) to destination A without performing any redaction, and send normal logs to destination B with redaction.

Author: The suggestion here was globally, but I see the point you are making for having it split out by exporter.

Author: I still need to add this into the document.

```

> This call will make sure that redactions applied follow the `STRICT` profile. If not set the `DEFAULT` will be used. Additionally there are 2 levels that can not be used in sensitivity details:

Reviewer 2: Is the **not** on purpose?
It seems like at least `ALWAYS` could be useful, for example as a temporary mitigation when a leakage is discovered, and before it can be properly fixed.

```suggestion
This call will make sure that redactions applied follow the `STRICT` profile. If not set the `DEFAULT` will be used. Additionally there are 2 levels that can be used in sensitivity details:
```

Author: I think what I wanted to express here is that ALWAYS and NEVER can not be reconfigured through `<SENSITIVITY_DETAILS>` as outlined above in the document. Because if allowed it would break expectations

Reviewer 7: Yeah that statement was a bit confusing to me as well, maybe it can be rephrased to express what you said above?

Author: I still need to add this into the document.

- `NEVER`: No redaction is applied, SDKs may choose to log a warning that this is a risky choice
- `ALWAYS`: All values with sensitivity details will be dropped

> Additionally SDK end users can provide advanced configuration (through code, configuration file, probably not environment variable) to add specific needs:

Reviewer 8: I like the direction this proposal is going toward, however, I'd like to challenge the notion that redaction is treated as an instrumentation issue, as opposed to a configuration issue. I wonder if it would be possible to treat redaction as a configuration issue, like we do sampling.

Reading through this document and arriving at this part, I was thinking about a solution that relies solely on SDK components (without any API changes needed), by providing SDK redactors and configuring them via "redaction profiles" (which consists of mappings from attribute names to redaction rules, similar to the example below). SDKs could provide some default redaction profiles (for example for redacting strict, stricter, or never), which are based on definitions in semantic conventions.

The main challenges of this approach would be considering multiple versions of semantic conventions, furthermore it wouldn't be that straightforward for authors of instrumentation libraries to add redaction rules.

However, it would give the benefit to have redaction rules defined at a central place. Given that the examples above (different regular expressions for different redaction levels), it might be error prone to implement those consistently across all usages of an attribute in different instrumentation libraries in different languages.

Author: > I wonder if it would be possible to treat redaction as a configuration issue, like we do sampling.

For 90% of the cases, I would say the answer to this is yes, but especially library authors need ways to express additional redaction requirements very locally, e.g. if they call a 3rd party service via a HTTP GET and they know that in this one specific case they need to apply additional redaction. Without a functionality for that they can either over-configure (e.g. apply it globally but potentially have other calls redacted without the need for that) or do their own logic on top of what we provide them. Both things are **OK** and we might decide against having the API for that (in a first version, or forever), but then we need to indiciate that somehow in the specification.

Author: See the updated version, I moved towards leading with the configuration centric approach and mentioned API capabilities towards the end

Additionally the entities operating the applications who leverage OpenTelemetry may have their own requirements for treating certain sensitive data.

Finally end-users may want to apply recommendations for [Data Minimization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_minimization), to avoid "unnecessary risks for the data subject".

**Note 1**: it is not (and can not be) the responsibility of the OpenTelemetry project to provide compliance with any of those regulations, this is a responsibility of the OTel end-user. OTel can only facilitate parts of those requirements.

**Note 2**: Those requirements are subject of change and outside of the control of the OpenTelemetry community.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

### Performance Impact

By adding an extra layer of processing every time an attribute value gets set, might have an impact on the performance. There might be ways to reduce that overhead, e.g. by only redacting values which are finalized and ready to exported such that updated values or sampled data does not need to be handled.

## Prior art and alternatives

### OTEPS

- [OTEP 100 - Sensitive Data Handling](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/100)

> - [OTEP 187 - Data Classification for resources and attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/187)

Reviewer 4: I think we'll eventually need to have something similar to this as well: semconv attributes would need a marker, about the common sensitivity of the attribute's value.

Author: I need to review those 2 PRs in detail and incorporate whatever we want to include here as well. I added a little bit of wording on classification (see my credit card example)

Ideally a combination is used.

### Alternative 2: Backend

The backend consuming the OpenTelemetry data can provide processing for filtering and redaction as well. The same objection as for the collector apply.

### Existing Solutions outside OpenTelemetry

There are many solutions outside OpenTelemetry that help to filter or redact sensitive data based on security and privacy requirements:

- [sanitize_field_name in Elastic Java](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/java/1.x/config-core.html#config-sanitize-field-names)
- [Filter sensitive data in AppDynamics Java Agent](https://docs.appdynamics.com/appd/24.x/24.4/en/application-monitoring/install-app-server-agents/java-agent/administer-the-java-agent/filter-sensitive-data)
- [GA4 data redaction](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/13544947?sjid=3336918779004544977-EU)
- [Configure Privacy Settings in Matamo](https://matomo.org/faq/general/configure-privacy-settings-in-matomo/)
- [DataDog Sensitive Data Redaction](https://docs.datadoghq.com/observability_pipelines/sensitive_data_redaction/)

## Open questions

> - **Question 1**: Should sensitivity details for an attribute in the semantic conventions be excluded from the stability guarantees? This means, updating them for a **stable** attribute is not a breaking change. The idea behind excluding them from the stability guarantees is that the requirements are subject of change due to changes in technology (see [#971](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/971), the list of query string values will evolve over time) or changes in regulatory requirements or both.

Reviewer 5: I think yes.

Reviewer 2: It feels like there should still be some stability definition.
I wouldn't want to see something that was redacted suddenly not be.

Author: That's a good point, maybe "adding redactions" may be outside, but "removing redactions" may require additional guard rails. It is probably unlikely that redactions will be removed, the only case I can think of is that something is deprecated for a very long time

Author: I will leave the question open, I can add some words on adding/removing redaction
